.. _alerts:

Managing Alerts
===============

.. warning::

   This page has not been fully updated for 2.0 yet! We'll get it updated soon.
   
Security Onion generates a lot of valuable information for you the second you plug it into a TAP or SPAN port. Between Zeek logs, alert data from Suricata, and full packet capture from Stenographer, you have, in a very short amount of time, enough information to begin making identifying areas of interest and making positive changes to your security stance.

.. note::

   Network Security Monitoring, as a practice, is not a solution you can plug into your network, make sure you see blinking lights and tell people you are "secure." It requires active intervention from an analyst to qualify the quantity of information presented. One of those regular interventions is to ensure that you are tuning properly and proactively attempting to reach an acceptable level of signal to noise.
   
There are three alerting engines within Security Onion: Suricata, Wazuh and Playbook (Sigma). Though each engine uses its own severity level system, Security Onion converts that to a standardized alert severity: 

``event.severity: 1,2,3,4``
``event.severity_label: low,medium,high,critical``

All alerts are viewable in Hunt or Kibana. Security Onion addtionally creates alerts in TheHive for ``high`` and ``critical`` severity alerts for more immediate attention.

Testing to make sure the IDS is working
---------------------------------------

Below, we'll provide a few ways we can test our IDS to make sure it is working as expected.

#. The easiest way to test might be simply accessing ``testmyids.com`` from a machine who's traffic is being monitored:

   ::
   
      curl testmyids.com

   We should see a corresponding alert (``GPL ATTACK_RESPONSE id check returned root``) in :ref:`hive`, :ref:`kibana`, and/or :ref:`hunt` if everything is configured correctly. If you do not see this alert, try checking to see if the rule is enabled in ``/opt/so/rules/nids/all.rules``. If it is not enabled, try enabling it via ``/etc/nsm/pulledpork/enablesid.conf`` and run ``rule-update`` (if this is a distributed deployment, update the management first, run ``rule-update``, then push the changes out to the other sensor(s)).

#. If in a production environment where you might not want to replay the example PCAPs, another way to test would be to use Scapy to craft a test PCAP file, in conjunction with a custom NIDS rule added to ``/opt/so/rules/nids/local.rules``:

-  **NIDS Rule**

   ::

     alert tcp any any -> any any (msg: "Security Onion - testing"; content: "SecurityOnion"; nocase; sid:1234567;)

   Now update your ruleset:
   
   ::
   
      sudo rule-update

-  **Scapy**

   ::
   
      sudo scapy
      pkt = Ether()/IP(dst="192.168.1.30")/TCP()/"SecurityOnion"
      wrpcap("so-testing.pcap", pkt)
   
   Press ``CTRL+D`` to exit scapy.  Then use tcpreplay to replay the pcap to your sniffing interface:
   
   ::
   
     sudo tcpreplay -i ens34 -M10 so-testing.pcap

   If everything went as planned, an alert should appear in TheHive/Kibana/Hunt with the message ``Security Onion - testing``.

Identifying overly active signatures
------------------------------------



Identifying rule categories
---------------------------

Both the Snort Subscriber (Talos) and the Emerging Threats rulesets come with a large number of rules enabled (over 20,000 by default). You should only run the rules necessary for your environment. So you may want to disable entire categories of rules that don't apply to you. Run the following command to get a listing of categories and the number of rules in each:

::

    cut -d\" -f2 /opt/so/rules/nids/all.rules | grep -v "^$" | grep -v "^#" | awk '{print $1, $2}'|sort |uniq -c |sort -nr

| Also see:
| https://github.com/shirkdog/pulledpork/blob/master/doc/README.CATEGORIES


So what's next?
---------------

Firstly, in tuning your sensor, you must understand whether or not taking corrective actions on this signature will lower your overall security stance. For some alerts, your understanding of your own network and the business being transacted across it will be the deciding factor. If you don't care that users are accessing facebook, you can silence the policy-based signatures that will generate alerts.

This signature, sid:1411, /is/ a useful signature to have on hand. Attackers will often search for SNMP enabled devices with default community strings in their attempts to pivot to other parts of the network. In this case, I know the alerts are being generated by benign traffic but I cannot guarantee that further alerts will be.

Another consideration to take into mind is determine whether or not the traffic is being generated by a misconfigured piece of equipment. If so, the most expedient measure is to correctly configure said equipment and then reinvestigate tuning.

There are multiple ways to handle overly productive signatures and we'll try to cover as many as we can without producing a full novel on the subject.

Disable the sid
---------------

Security Onion uses ``idstools`` to download new signatures every night and process them against a set list of user generated configurations.

In a distributed Security Onion environment, you only need to change the configuration on the manager and then all other nodes will get the updated rules automatically.

As mentioned before, take care in disabling signatures as it can be likely that a more appropriate response is warranted.

To enable or disable SIDs for :ref:`suricata`, the :ref:`salt` ``idstools`` pillar can be used in the minion pillar file (``/opt/so/saltstack/pillar/minions/<minionid>.sls``).
 
If SID 1234 is commented out and you want to enable it, set the following in the `idstools` section of the minion pillar file:
 
::

   idstools:
     sids:
       enabled:
         - 1234

If SID 4321 is noisy, you can disable it as follows:

::

   idstools:
     sids:
       disabled:
         - 4321

Then run ``sudo salt-call state.highstate`` to update the config.

Modify the SID
--------------

``/opt/so/saltstack/pillar/minions/<minionid>.sls`` contains a ``modify`` sub-section under the ``idstools`` section. You can list modifications here and then run ``sudo salt-call state.highstate`` to update the config.

Rewrite the signature
---------------------

In some cases, you may not want to use the modify option above, but instead create a copy of the rule and disable the original. In Security Onion, locally created rules are stored in ``/opt/so/rules/nids/local.rules``.

-  Edit the ``/opt/so/rules/nids/local.rules`` file using ``vi`` or your favorite text editor:

   ::

        sudo vi /opt/so/rules/nids/local.rules

-  NIDS rules are incredibly flexible, this is a bird's eye view of the rule format:

   ::

        Action Protocol SrcIP SrcPort Direction DestIP DestPort (rule options)

-  Here is the rule that has been generating so many alerts on our sensor(s)

   ::

        macphisto@SecOnion-Dev:~$ grep -i "GPL SNMP public access udp" /opt/so/rules/nids/all.rules
         alert udp $EXTERNAL_NET any -> $HOME_NET 161 (msg:"GPL SNMP public access udp"; content:"public"; fast_pattern:only; reference:bugtraq,2112; reference:bugtraq,4088; reference:bugtraq,4089; reference:cve,1999-0517; reference:cve,2002-0012; reference:cve,2002-0013; classtype:attempted-recon; sid:2101411; rev:11;)

-  We can rewrite the rule so it's a little less active. We will rewrite the rule to ignore this kind of alert if the destination is any of the hosts we've identified.
-  For starters let's create some variables in ``/opt/so/rules/nids/local.rules`` to define the traffic. First we're going to define a variable for our called overactive hosts called OVERACTIVE

   ::

        var OVERACTIVE [192.168.0.31,192.168.0.33,192.168.0.5,192.168.0.51]

-  We can plug this information into our NIDS rule format,

   ::

        alert udp $HOME_NET any -> !$OVERACTIVE any (msg:"GPL SNMP public access udp"; content:"public"; fast_pattern:only; reference:bugtraq,2112; reference:bugtraq,4088; reference:bugtraq,4089; reference:cve,1999-0517; reference:cve,2002-0012; reference:cve,2002-0013; classtype:attempted-recon; sid:9001411; rev:1;)

-  We also gave the alert a unique signature id (sid) by bumping it into the 90,000,000 range and set the revision to 1.
-  Now that we have a signature that will generate alerts a little more selectively, we need to disable the original signature. Like above, we edit the minion pillar and add the following to the ``idstools - sids - disabled`` section:

   ::

          - 2101411

-  Then run ``sudo salt-call state.highstate`` to update the config

Threshold
---------

You can manage threshold.conf for Suricata using Saltstack pillars. The format of the pillar file can be seen below, as well as in ``/opt/so/saltstack/local/pillar/thresholding/pillar.usage`` and ``/opt/so/saltstack/local/pillar/thresholding/pillar.example``

Usage:

::

   thresholding:
     sids:
       <signature id>:
         - threshold:
             gen_id: <generator id>
             type: <threshold | limit | both>
             track: <by_src | by_dst>
             count: <count>
             seconds: <seconds>
         - rate_filter:
             gen_id: <generator id>
             track: <by_src | by_dst | by_rule | by_both>
             count: <count>
             seconds: <seconds>
             new_action: <alert | pass>
             timeout: <seconds>
         - suppress:
             gen_id: <generator id>
             track: <by_src | by_dst | by_either>
             ip: <ip | subnet>
             
Example:

::

   thresholding:
     sids:
       8675309:
         - threshold:
             gen_id: 1
             type: threshold
             track: by_src
             count: 10
             seconds: 10
         - threshold:
             gen_id: 1
             type: limit
             track: by_dst
             count: 100
             seconds: 30
         - rate_filter:
             gen_id: 1
             track: by_rule
             count: 50
             seconds: 30
             new_action: alert
             timeout: 30
         - suppress:
             gen_id: 1
             track: by_either
             ip: 10.10.3.7
       11223344:
         - threshold:
             gen_id: 1
             type: limit
             track: by_dst
             count: 10
             seconds: 10
         - rate_filter:
             gen_id: 1
             track: by_src
             count: 50
             seconds: 20
             new_action: pass
             timeout: 60
         - suppress:
             gen_id: 1
             track: by_src
             ip: 10.10.3.0/24
             
In order to apply the threshold to all nodes, place the pillar in ``/opt/so/saltstack/local/pillar/static.sls``. If you want to apply the threshold to a single node, place the pillar in ``/opt/so/saltstack/local/pillar/minions/<MINION_ID>.sls``

Suppressions
------------

A suppression rule allows you to make some finer grained decisions about certain rules without the onus of rewriting them. With this functionality we can suppress rules based on their signature, the source or destination address and even the IP or full CIDR network block. This way, you still have the basic ruleset, but the situations in which they fire are altered. It's important to note that with this functionality, care should be given to the suppressions being written to make sure they do not suppress legitimate alerts. See above for ``suppress`` examples.

Why is idstools ignoring disabled rules
---------------------------------------

If your syntax is correct, you are likely trying to disable a rule that has flowbits set. For a quick primer on flowbits see http://blog.snort.org/2011/05/resolving-flowbit-dependancies.html and section 3.6.10 of the Snort Manual (http://www.snort.org/docs).

Let's look at the following rules using:

::

       alert tcp $HOME_NET any -> $EXTERNAL_NET !1433 (msg:"ET POLICY Outbound MSSQL Connection to Non-Standard Port - Likely Malware"; flow:to_server,established; content:"|12 01 00|"; depth:3; content:"|00 00 00 00 00 00 15 00 06 01 00 1b 00 01 02 00 1c 00|"; distance:1; within:18; content:"|03 00|"; distance:1; within:2; content:"|00 04 ff 08 00 01 55 00 00 00|"; distance:1; within:10; flowbits:set,ET.MSSQL; classtype:bad-unknown; sid:2013409; rev:3;)

       alert tcp $HOME_NET any -> $EXTERNAL_NET 1433 (msg:"ET POLICY Outbound MSSQL Connection to Standard port (1433)"; flow:to_server,established; content:"|12 01 00|"; depth:3; content:"|00 00 00 00 00 00 15 00 06 01 00 1b 00 01 02 00 1c 00|"; distance:1; within:18; content:"|03 00|"; distance:1; within:2; content:"|00 04 ff 08 00 01 55 00 00 00|"; distance:1; within:10; flowbits:set,ET.MSSQL; classtype:bad-unknown; sid:2013410; rev:4;)

       alert tcp $HOME_NET any -> $EXTERNAL_NET !1433 (msg:"ET TROJAN Bancos.DV MSSQL CnC Connection Outbound"; flow:to_server,established; flowbits:isset,ET.MSSQL; content:"|49 00 B4 00 4D 00 20 00 54 00 48 00 45 00 20 00 4D 00 41 00 53 00 54 00 45 00 52 00|"; classtype:trojan-activity; sid:2013411; rev:1;)

If you try to disable the first two rules without disabling the third rule (which has "flowbits:isset...) the third rule could never fire due to one of the first two rules needing to fire first. Pulled Pork (helpfully) resolves all of your flowbit dependencies, and in this case, is "re-enabling" that rule for you on the fly. Disabling all three of those rules by adding the following to disablesid.conf has the obvious negative effect of disabling all three of the rules:

::

       1:2013409
       1:2013410
       1:2013411

When you run ``sudo so-rule-update``, watch the "Setting Flowbit State..." section and you can see that if you disable all three (or however many rules share that flowbit) that the "Enabled XX flowbits" line is decrimented and all three rules should then be disabled in your ``all.rules``.
