.. _elastic-fleet:

Elastic Fleet
=============

:ref:`soc` includes a link on the sidebar labeled ``Elastic Fleet`` which takes you to the Fleet page inside :ref:`kibana`.

Configuration
-------------

Elastic Fleet provides centralized management of configuration within it's user interface inside of Kibana.

Configuration options for various components are detailed below.

Agents
~~~~~~
This section displays registered [Elastic agents](https://docs.securityonion.net/en/2.4/elastic-agent.html), and allows the user to add additional agents.

To view agent details, click the ``Host`` name. 

To assign the agent to a new policy, unenroll, upgrade the agent, or perform other actions, click the ``Actions`` menu on the right side of the agent listing and select the appropriate option.

By default, Elastic Agent is installed on every Security Onion grid node. As a result, all grid node agents will be enrolled in the ``SO-Grid-Nodes`` agent policy. We do not recommend removing policy settings for Security Onion grid node agents.

Agent Policies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Agent policies dictate what data each agent will ingest and forward to Elasticsearch. This could be through the use of an HTTP, log file, or TCP-based input.

The individual components within each agent policy are called integrations (referred to as ``package policies`` at the API level), and refer to a specific input and settings pertinent to a data source.

For example, the ``SO-Grid-Nodes`` agent policy is comprised of the following integrations:

- elasticsearch-logs (``Elasticsearch`` integration)
- import-evtx-logs (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- import-suricata-logs (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- import-zeek-logs (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- kratos-logs (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- osquery-grid-nodes (``Osquery Manager`` integration)
- redis-logs (``Redis`` integration)
- strelka-logs (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- suricata-logs (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- syslog-tcp-514 (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- syslog-udp-514 (``Custom Logs`` integration)
- system-grid-nodes (``System`` integration)
- zeek-logs (``Custom Logs`` integration)

Adding an Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
New integrations can be added to existing policies to provide increased visibility and more comprehensive monitoring.

To add an integration to an existing policy:

From ``Fleet`` -> ``Agent policies`` -> ``$Policy name``, click ``Add Integration`` and follow the steps for adding the integration.

Adding a Custom Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
A custom integration can be added by adding an integration such as the ``Custom Logs`` integration. We can specify various settings relative to the data source and define additional actions to be performed.

Enrollment Tokens
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
An enrollment token allows an agent to enroll in Fleet, subscribe to a particular agent policy, and send data.

Each agent policy typically uses it's own enrollment token. It is recommended that these tokens are NOT to be changed, especially those generated by default Security Onion agent policies.

Data Streams
~~~~~~~~~~~~
Data collected by Elastic Agent is sent to a [data stream](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/fleet/current/fleet-overview.html#data-streams-intro) by default. This allows data to be efficiently categorized and managed across a variety of datasets. This section within the Fleet UI allows for a quick review of data streams generated by data from Elastic Agent.

Settings
~~~~~~~~
The section provides details, such as:

- Fleet server hosts in your deployment
- Configured outputs (specifies where data will be sent; this should include Elasticseach for the Fleet server and Logstash for Elastic Agent)
- Method in which agent binaries will be downloaded (this will be a a local artifact repository if running an airgapped deployment)

.. note::

    We do NOT recommend changing these settings, as these are managed by Security Onion.

More Information
----------------

.. note::

    For more information about Fleet, please see https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/fleet.html.
